So I think a lot of this story is pretty straight forward, but several pieces don't fit well, and I've been trying to piece it together. I don't think all of it takes place inside the facility, because of the ruined city. You see normal places being essentially depopulated-- masses of people are being enslaved, and carted away by the masks to be turned into Albinos/Drones. It makes sense the secret organization is gathering these people-- They need slave labor to construct their massive facilities, and bodies to gestate worms in for more advanced hive mind experiments (like the reverse water ponds-- those are worn down/broken workers, or people that got too messed up before being captured to use, so they breed the control worms in them, with the VAX machines controlling/helping/monitoring the process. The secret group is doing all kinds of different types of experiments, but they seem set on this hive mind, it is their priority. But if you pay attention, nearly everything is in ruins, the farms, the cities, even huge parts of their facility. Most places are inhabited by a skeleton crew at best, and there are lots of abandoned experiments and labs (mermaids and shockwave tester for instance). This is tying into an explanation I've been pondering, considering the parts of the story that don't fit neatly. So they have a diorama of the Huddle/Meatball in it's final resting place, meaning they already knew exactly how events would play out in the very end. But, if they could control the Huddle so directly, why does the CEO let himself be killed? Even if he's some rando they dressed up to fool you, why bother tricking something you already control? So they don't actually control the Huddle, they just knew how things would play out. Originally they seem fine with either capturing or killing the boy-- They use tranq darts (likely standard issue slave-hunting gear), but will also sick Holves on you, which brutally kill you every time, so they aren't concerned with the boy at all originally. He isn't part of some huge plan of theirs, why sick murderous dogs on someone you needed to accomplish a goal for you? All this leaves me with a final explanation:


The secret organization can see into the future. One of their experiments gave them the ability to see into the future, probably in a limited capacity. A lot of things make sense with this perspective, they have some kind of end goal in mind, and the Huddle plays a part in it.  They don't need to bother with secrecy or discretion anymore, they know they can successfully start capturing whole cities of people. They don't care about their other experiments, because they already know which one is going to pay off big time. The decay you see everywhere makes sense-- everyone is just focused on accomplishing the goal they all fatalistically pursue, literally everything else is unnecessary. They knew the Huddle would escape eventually, even if they didn't know the specifics, which is why they organize that big viewing party when they finally realize it's actually happening. That's why it seems like they're all just waiting for something to happen. If they knew the boy would spark the Huddle from the beginning, they could of just captured him and dumped him in the tank without all the dangerous adventures in between, would of accomplished the exact same thing. The facility members stop attacking the boy right around the time he gets deep into the facility, which makes me think they finally realize he's part of the foretold events late in the game, before that he's just another slave to recruit, or dispose of. Nobody knew exactly what was going to happen in between (especially the CEO), which is why everyone is afraid of the Huddle, but still eager to get it on it's way out of the facility, just like they knew the Huddle would do at that point. Their reactions, the possible death of the CEO, and the Diorama don't make any sense unless they already had a vague, but oddly specific, idea of what would happen, and notice nobody is overly concerned that you'll just go kill crazy and start murdering everyone. They feel comfortable bringing their children to come see you, even if you just pile drove their boss into a pile of Grape Jelly, because they know things all work out in the end, even though they don't have exact details. The only thing they seem to know for certain, is that you end up on the beach, in the nimbus, just like they planned. My guess, is that they want to bring about a massive collective consciousness using the mind-worms that they may of extracted from the Limbo dimension-- or Limbo is what the world of Inside eventually turns into. The huddle will probably disgorge those worms everywhere eventually, spreading their control across the whole world, and "uniting" humanity, possibly even the animal kingdom too. Something like the Annelids from System Shock 2 mixed with the slugs from the Slither movie.

